## Key takeaways

* The D614G mutation does not seem to directly affect the binding of the spike protein to human cells (the strength of binding between the original form and the D614G version seems to be similar).
* The spike protein consists of 2 segments. The first is responsible for attaching the virus to the human lung cells, and the second segment  is responsible for taking the virus inside the human cells. The two parts are connected together by a thread that can be cut by a human protein. The D614G mutation stabilizes the interaction between the two parts, and helps the spike protein not fall apart even after the two parts’ connecting threads are cut.
* This stabilization seems to help the virus stick to human cells and infect them. However, this experiment was carried out under conditions that are very different than would happen under a normal COVID infection, with some essential pieces missing. These results need to be replicated under closer conditions to COVID infection (using real viral particles, and maybe human lung cells), before the results can be accepted.
* While it seems like this mutation under lab settings can increase infection rate, the mechanism of this increase remains very much clouded with multiple studies proposing different or opposing mechanisms.

## Why is this important?

Mutations in viruses are one way for viruses to survive, evolve and continue infecting hosts. This is why we need a new flu vaccine every year. Keeping up to date with the mutations that are appearing in COVID is very important both in terms of preparing for changes in the pandemic, as well as making sure our therapeutics and preventatives are as effective against the virus with these new mutations as they were against the original form of the virus. The D614G mutant was identified at the end of April. This mutation seems to spread much more quickly than the original version of the virus, and by April had become the dominant form of the virus. The original study was not able to show any clinical differences between patients with the different forms of the virus in terms of length of hospital stay or mortality. Nevertheless, such a rapid rate of growth for the mutant form was very unusual and required further investigation.

The current work tries to see if they can show, under lab settings, if there is a difference between the two forms of the virus. As working with the virus carries a lot of risk and requires more sophisticated labs, most researchers work on human viruses using what are known as Virus Like Particles (VLPs) or pseudoviruses (PVs). In the case of COVID, the researchers take an unrelated virus (that is often not harmful to humans) and add the protein of interest from COVID, or they create a virus particle that lacks essential proteins, which means it is not able to replicate in human cells. The danger of this approach is that if the new conditions are too far away from the normal conditions of COVID infection, the results from these experiments might not be the same as the results if the experiments were carried out with the real virus on the correct cells.
